So let's dive into throwing and handling errors
and here I do have an error in my custom validator.
Now this will be handled behind the scenes by the express validator package,
so let's add some code that is not handled behind the scenes.
And for that, I'll first of all take a step backward,
I even quit my development server and I'll temporarily add a new file here, errorplayground.js
.
I will remove that, it's not related to the app but there we can execute javascript code and we can execute it
with the node runtime of course and in here,
let's create a new constant,
sum where I take two values, A and B,
whoops,
so sum will be a constant that holds an anonymous arrow function, A and B and I return A plus B
and then now there I call sum with 1 and 2 and I console log the result
let's say. Now if I do this, we can execute this file with node error playground.js
like this and we get three in the console down there.
Now that's of course nice
but now let's add an error.
Let's say I only pass one argument instead of two,
now if I execute this again, I get not a number but not an error, not a technical error object.
Now let's say here I check if A and B,
so both has to be true-ish, then I will return
A plus B
otherwise I'll throw, that is a built-in keyword, a new error and that's a built-in object
node ships with where I say invalid arguments, something like this.
Now let's execute this file again
and now we see such an error message which we saw before in the course as well.
Here we have our own error message and then we got a callstack which allows us to find out at which
function and which line number this error was thrown and what was called before that error.
We saw that before because that is an unhandled error. We throw an error and that is a built-in functionality,
throwing such errors and node and a lot of the packages we use also throw errors behind the scenes,
for example mongodb will throw an error if it can't connect or if an operation fails.
So such errors can be thrown and if we don't handle them, then our application just crashes
and that's what we saw earlier in the course too.
You might remember cases where I did something and we got stuck and that refresh icon in the browser
kept on spinning and nothing happened,
that was because our server crashed because we had an error which we did not handle.
Now how can we handle errors?
Well one solution for synchronous code, so code that executes line by line immediately and does not wait
for anything,
so for example where we don't interact with files or where we don't send requests, well such code can
be wrapped with try catch, another built-in language feature.
We try a certain code and then we have to add catch where we catch a potential error that might have
been thrown and in catch we can now handle it,
for example here I could output error occured
and then I console log my error like this.
Now if I re-execute myerrorplayground.js file, I still get this error here
but I get this additional error occured message and if I not log my error object here and I execute this, then
I actually get just this,
so then it does not crash and log it automatically
but we could do anything we want.
We could continue with other code after this,
so here I could have
this works.
I could execute this line and we see this works being output here.
Just to demonstrate this, if I comment out try catch
and I just try to console log someone, so I call this with an error being thrown,
then we don't see this works anywhere because it crashes with our error that is being thrown and it
does not continue with other code.
So this is why handling code like this is a good thing to do because this ensures that we can continue
with code, that we can handle this gracefully, in our node express application
we could send an error response here which renders a valid page without crashing everything but which
informs the user that something bad happened
and in the end, this is what the express validator package does for us with our thrown error. In
auth.js where I throw this error,
in the end express validator catches this and then just adds it to its own error array and allows
us to read that list of errors it caught,
so that is what happens behind the scenes you could say.
Now here we have a look at an error and synchronous code throwing an error which we can handle with
try catch.
Now we also have async operations that can fail of course and such operations when using promises are
handled with then and catch
and that is what we can see a lot in our code. Here where I do something, where I find a user, I have my
then block where I handle the case that the database operation succeeded,
then I here still have my custom case to see if we did get a user because the database operation can
succeed even without retrieving a user
but I then also have a catch block here where I catch any errors that happened.
So here for example that would be the catch block related to my find one method.
So if the database operation fails because we don't have read access because the database server is
down temporarily, anything like that, then we make it into this catch block.
So this is try catch, just with async code you could say, then is your success case and catch allows
you to execute code if that fails. Catch by the way collects all errors that are thrown by any prior
then blocks,
so if we had more than then block in our chain here, catch would fire on any error thrown in any then
block or any operation executed in a then block,
that's just a side note.
So this is how we can work with errors, how we can handle them. I'll now get rid of the playground file,
you find it attached to the video if you want to explore it a bit more,
let's now see in our application how we can improve error handling.